---
title: Alioth Compiler Manual
author: GodGnidoc
date: 2019/07/17
---

# 1. About this manual

This manual is written for users of the compiler of the Alioth programming language.

The corresponding compiler version is `V0.3`.

This manual states all functions provided by the compiler and how to use them.

- [1. About this manual](#1-About-this-manual)
- [2. Basic concepts](#2-Basic-concepts)
  - [2.1. Target](#21-Target)
    - [2.1.1. Auto](#211-Auto)
    - [2.1.2. Executable](#212-Executable)
    - [2.1.3. Static](#213-Static)
    - [2.1.4. Dynamic](#214-Dynamic)
    - [2.1.5. Repository](#215-Repository)
    - [2.1.6. Package](#216-Package)
  - [2.2. Space](#22-Space)
    - [2.2.1. Main space](#221-Main-space)
    - [2.2.2. Sub space](#222-Sub-space)
    - [2.2.3. Extra space](#223-Extra-space)
  - [2.3. Package](#23-Package)
  - [2.4. Repository](#24-Repository)

# 2. Basic concepts

There are some basic concepts you need to know before you can properly use the compiler.

Some of them has the same name as the other concept but carries different meaning, you can add prefixes to solve this problem within certain context if necessary, like "Alioth Repository", "Alioth Target" etc.

## 2.1. Target

Unlike the common compilers always process some source documents as input and generate a file in certain format as output, the compiler of the Alioth programming language does more.

Basically you can just execute command to run the compiler to generate some output file from source documents. Furthermore you can start the compiler to host a repository or to host a package.

A **target** is an object which is the reason why you run the compiler. May be the output file in format of static link library or dynamic link library vs executable entity. May be the hosted repository or the hosted package.

### 2.1.1. Auto

Compiler will try to generate static link library or binary executable entity. It depends on wether compiler could find the entry mark within source code.

### 2.1.2. Executable

Compiler will try to generate binary executable entity from source code.

### 2.1.3. Static

Compiler will try to generate static link library, regardless whether there was an entry mark.

### 2.1.4. Dynamic

Compiler will try to generate dynamic link library.

### 2.1.5. Repository

Compiler will start the host mode and stay running until you interrupt the execution. Compiler will accept and process requests from other remote compilers to provide compiling resources hosted in this repository.

### 2.1.6. Package

Compiler will send package informations to the specified repository host. Then, depending on the configuration, compiler will choose to exit or stay running to process resource requests.

## 2.2. Space

The abstract location where compiler will look for compiling resources in. Generally the compiler maps **space**s to file system path, you could change that by command line parameters or configure files.

### 2.2.1. Main space

Main spaces have no parent space, they are used to contain sub spaces or files.

- root
  
  The root space is used to contain configuration files and standard libraries for the alioth programming language; There is only one root space each time the compiler runs.
- work

  The work space is used to contain compiling resources would be used for the current target; There is only one work space each time the compiler runs.
- apkg

  The spaces of apkg kind are used to host packages for the Alioth programming language software development kits. SDKs installed by alioth compiler will be managed in certain path, therefor their home dir can be scaned to be apkg space.

### 2.2.2. Sub space

Sub spaces are those spaces who need their parent spaces to make them locatable. There are several subs spaces defined, each of them has the exact duty.

- arc

  Sub spaces used to contain static link libraries produced by the compiling target.
- bin

  Sub spaces used to contain executable files prodced by the compiling target.
- doc

  Sub spaces used to contain documents generated by compiler.
- inc

  Sub spaces used to contain source code documents written by user.
- lib

  Sub spaces used to contain dynamic link libraries produced by the compiling target.
- obj

  Sub spaces used to contain object files generated by compiler.
- src

  Sub spaces used to contain source code documents written by user.

### 2.2.3. Extra space

## 2.3. Package

Package is the only unit when to install, remove or refer.

## 2.4. Repository

Repository is the container of packages. There always a static repository which is used to host packages installed locally, there is no need to run a compiler to host it.